A Brief List to Help Intelligent Novices Namo buddhāya. Regarding the differences between Buddhists and non-Buddhists, those who do not accept produced phenomena as impermanent, defiled phenomena as suffering and liberation as peace are not Buddhists, and those who accept them as such are Buddhists. Moreover, the main difference is that those who go to the Three Jewels for refuge are Buddhists and those who do not are not Buddhists. With regard to the tenet systems of the Buddhists, there are two: namely, the Lesser Vehicle and the Greater Vehicle. Furthermore, those who accept the true existence of external objects are proponents of the Lesser Vehicle and those who do not accept this are proponents of the Greater Vehicle. Within the Lesser Vehicle, there are two types: the Great Exposition (Vaibhāṣika) school and the Sūtra (Sautrāntika) school. Of these, it is the Great Exposition school that asserts that objects and consciousness are in contact and that the latter nakedly apprehends the former. It is the Sūtra school that asserts that objects are hidden from consciousness. Likewise, the Greater Vehicle is of two types: the Mind-Only (Cittamātra) school and the Middle Way (Madhyamaka) school. The Mind-Only school is the one that realizes the mind as truly existing and the Middle Way school is the one that realizes that even the mind does not truly exist. Moreover, the Mind-Only school is also of two types: the True Aspectarian (Satyākāravādin) school and the False Aspectarian (Nirākāravādin) school. They both assert that appearances are mind, but the True Aspectarians are those who assert true existence with respect to the mere aspect, and the False Aspectarians are those who assert even that aspect is false. The Middle Way school is also of two types: namely, the Autonomist (Svātantrika) school and the Consequentialist (Prāsaṅgika) school. The Autonomists are those who accept emptiness and so forth following the statement of a proof, and the Consequentialists are those for whom the elaborations of assertions are thoroughly pacified. The difference between Sūtra and Tantra is that the Mantra Vehicle is transcendent in terms of four features: being free from confusion, having manifold means, lacking difficulties, and being meant for those with superior faculties. Moreover, the Mantra Vehicle consists of four classes of Tantra. Action Tantra is that by means of which one pursues accomplishments through the mode of sovereign and servant, having generated the divinity in front of one's ordinary self. Conduct Tantra is that by means of which one obtains accomplishments through the mode of friends, having viewed both-oneself and the one in front-as divinities. Yoga Tantra is that in which the divine wisdom being-the pledge being-is located in oneself and sealed with the four seals; during meditation breaks, the wisdom beings leave by untying the seals and one remains as an ordinary being. Unsurpassed Yoga Tantra is distinguished by indivisibility with the deity-the pledge being and the wisdom being-and the wisdom of great bliss during every meditative session and the breaks. The essence of the path of mantra that causes ripening is a receptacle for the arising of wisdom; that which causes liberation is the actual means that generates wisdom. This is from the point of view of the primary features of the Mantra Vehicle. With regard to what causes liberation, the generation stage is of four types. What purifies birth through warmth and wetness is the fivefold generation of actual enlightenment. What purifies birth through an egg is generation from seed and drops. What purifies a womb birth is revealing from the birth. What purifies a miraculous birth is perfection in instantaneous recollection. Although each of these is purified individually, all types of birth are purified automatically. In terms of the perfection stage, the paths of the two middle empowerments have characteristics, and the path of the last empowerment is without characteristics. Yet, even within each of these, there are infinite numbers of methods on account of their having characteristics or not having characteristics, or being gross or subtle. The ultimate luminosity of realization is the dharmakāya of the Buddha. In relation to that, all luminosities of the trainees are the luminosity of experience. Moreover, for the trainees, experience occurs during the day and realization occurs at night. During daytime, when the perceptions of the six aggregates of the luminosity have not subsided, there is experience; when these have subsided, there is realization. During the night, when the other three perceptions have not been fully merged, there is experience; when they have been merged, there is realization, and so on. Thus, the subdivisions are numerous. The ground, path, and result of the Great Seal are as follows: the unfabricated mind's way of abiding is the ground, recognizing its inherent nature is the path, and its actualization is the result. Regarding the three great ones, Great Perfection (Dzogchen) is the one that mainly focuses on appearances, the Great Middle Way (Great Madhyamaka) is the one that mainly focuses on emptiness, and the Great Seal (Mahāmudrā) is the one that mainly focuses on union. In terms of the four yogas of the Great Seal, the yoga of singlepointedness is mind abiding as emptiness and luminous, the yoga of freedom from elaborations is seeing one's inherent nature as it is, the yoga of the single taste is the understanding of appearance and mind in union, and the yoga of non-meditation is the exhaustion of all characteristics. These correlate with the paths accordingly: the yoga of singlepointedness is correlated with the path of accumulation and path of application, the yoga of freedom from elaborations is correlated with the path of seeing, the yoga of the single taste is correlated with the seven impure stages, and the yoga of non-meditation is correlated with the purified stages. The three vows are as follows: the vow of individual liberation is the avoidance of harming others and the causes of that, the vow of the bodhisattva is to accomplish benefits for others as much as possible, and the vow of unsurpassed secret mantra is for both of these to be infused by divinities and wisdom. Within the Perfection Vehicle, on the occasion of armor-like practice, each of the six transcendental practices is comprised of six; similarly, in the Mantra Vehicle there exists a mode of meditation where the respective meditations and recitations related to the tutelary deity are connected to the five paths. The first two-(1) the path of accumulation and (2) the path of application-comprise refuge, bodhicitta, and the accumulation of merit through the seven-limb practice with respect to the field of merit. Through mantras such as svabhāva and so forth, (3) the path of seeing is the emptiness that purifies all that appears as subject and object. Then, visualizing the form body is (4) the path of meditation, namely, the eight stages. The blessings and the wisdoms entering the three abodes are the three pure stages. After the empowerment has been bestowed, being sealed with the lord of the family is awakening. Recitation is turning the wheel of the Dharma. Finally, absorption into luminosity is passing beyond suffering. Emerging from that as the union body and entering into (5) the path of conduct are the illustration of incessant enlightened activities. In this way, having taken the aspect of the result as the path, the swift accomplishment of the result is the unsurpassed feature of mantra. 
